THE Eye is at once the most wonderful and the most useful of all our
organs of sense. It is especially by means of the eye that we gain a
knowledge of the exterior world. Our other senses are far more limited
in their action: thus the sense of touch only extends to objects within
our reach; the sense of taste is only a delicate and exquisite
modification of the sense of touch; the sense of smell can only be
exercised on substances that are close to us; and the use of our ears is
limited by the distance at which the loudest sound ceases to impress
them. But the eye has the privilege of extending its dominion, whether
for mere enjoyment or for serious instruction, far beyond the limits of
this little world. Not only is it the origin of all our ideas upon every
object that comes within its ken; not only does it reveal to us our own
position and that of our surroundings; but, thanks to the discoveries of
modern science, it is able to admire, on the one hand, a world of
infinite minuteness that remained unknown to us for centuries, and, on
the other, the immeasurable immensity of the starry universe.

Admirable as the eye undoubtedly is through the possession of the power
of vision, it is also capable of enchanting us by its own particular
beauties. Not to speak of its internal mechanism, which we shall
consider very fully by and by, let us for a moment examine its outward
appearance. Have you never, dear reader, been enchanted with a pair of
soft and gentle eyes, or with a couple of black orbs veiled with long
dark lashes, or with those wondrous eyes that rival the heavens in
colour and depth, shedding on you rays of light whose mute eloquence was
irresistible? If it be true that man’s face is the canvas upon which the
affections and desires of his mind are depicted as soon as they are
formed, the eyes are unquestionably the central point of the picture,
and it is in them, as in a looking-glass, that every sentiment that
passes across our brain is reflected.

When the mind is undisturbed, says Buffon, all the parts of the face are
in a state of repose; their proportion, unity, and general appearance
indicate the pleasing harmony of our thoughts and the perfect calmness
of our mind; but when we are agitated, the human face becomes a living
picture, in which the passions that disturb us are depicted with equal
force and delicacy, a picture in which every emotion is expressed by a
stroke, every action by a letter, so to speak; in which the quickness of
the impression outstrips the will, and reveals by the most sympathetic
signs the image of our secret trouble.

It is more especially in the eyes, adds this great naturalist, that
these signs are manifested and recognised. The eye is connected with the
mind more than any other organ: it seems almost to be in contact with it
and to participate in all its movements; it expresses in obedience to it
the strongest passions and the most tumultuous emotions, as well as the
gentlest thoughts and most delicate sentiments, and reproduces them in
all their force and purity just as they have sprung into existence; it
transmits them with exquisite rapidity even to the minds of others,
where they once more become impressed with all their original fire,
movement, and reality. The eye both receives and reflects the light of
thought and the warmth of sentiment, and is at once the sense of the
mind and the tongue of the intellect. Persons who are short-sighted, or
who squint, have much less of this external intelligence that dwells in
the eye. It is only the stronger passions that can bring the other
features of the face into play, that are depicted on their physiognomy;
and the effects of fine thought and delicate feeling are rendered
apparent with much greater difficulty.

The elegant author of _L’Histoire Naturelle_ rightly thinks that we are
so accustomed only to see things from the outside, that we are hardly
aware how much this exterior view of everything influences the judgment
of even the gravest and most thoughtful of us. Thus we are apt to set
down a man as unintellectual whose physiognomy does not particularly
strike us; and we allow his clothes, and even the manner in which he
wears his hair, to influence our judgment of him. Hence, our author goes
on to say, not wholly without some show of reason, that a man of sense
ought to look upon his clothes as part of himself, because they really
are so in the eyes of others, and play an important part in the general
idea that is formed of him who wears them.

The vivacity or languor of the movement of the eyes forms one of the
chief characteristics of facial expression, and their colour helps to
render this characteristic more striking. The different colours seen in
the eye are dark hazel, or black, as it is generally called, light
hazel, blue, greenish grey, dark grey, and light grey. The velvety
substance which gives the colour to the iris is arranged in little
ramifications and specks, the former being directed towards the centre
of the eye, the latter filling up the gaps between the threads.
Sometimes they are both arranged in so regular a manner that instances
have been known in which the irises of different eyes have appeared to
be so much alike that they seemed to have been copied from the same
design. These little threads and specks are held together by a very fine
network.

The commonest colours seen in the eye are hazel and blue, and it mostly
happens that both these colours are found in the same individual, giving
rise to that peculiar greenish-grey hue that is far from being uncommon.
Buffon thinks that blue and black eyes are the most beautiful, but this
of course is a matter of taste. It is true that the vivacity and fire
which play so important a part in giving character to the eye, are more
perceptible in dark eyes than in those whose tints are lighter; black
eyes, therefore, have greater force of expression, while in blue eyes
there is more softness and delicacy. In the former we see a brilliant
fire, which sparkles uniformly on account of the iris, which is of the
same colour throughout, giving in all parts the same reflection; but a
great difference may be perceived in the intensity of the light
reflected from blue eyes, from the fact of the various tints of colour
producing different reflections. There are some eyes that are remarkable
for being almost destitute of colour, and appear to be constituted in an
abnormal manner. The iris is tinted with shades of blue and grey of so
light a hue that it appears quite white in some places. The shades of
hazel in such eyes are so light that they are hardly distinguishable
from grey and white, in spite even of the contrast of colour.

For our part, we think that the beauty of the eye consists not so much
in its colour, or even in its harmony with the rest of the face, but in
its expression.

There are also numerous instances of green eyes. This colour is, of
course, much less frequent than blue, grey, or hazel. It often happens,
too, that the two eyes vary in colour in the same individual. This
defect is not confined to the human species, being shared by the horse
and the cat. In most other animals the colour of the two eyes is always
similar. The colour of the eye in most animals is either hazel or grey.
Aristotle imagined that grey eyes were stronger than blue, that those
persons whose eyes are prominent cannot see so far as others, and that
brown eyes are less valuable in the dark than those of another tint; but
modern investigations have failed to bear out the ancient philosopher’s
ideas with regard to the human eye.

Although the eye appears to move about in every direction, it has in
reality only one movement, that of rotation round its centre, by means
of which the eyeball rises or falls, or passes from side to side at
will. In man the eyes are parallel with each other in relation to their
axes; he can consequently direct them at pleasure upon the same object:
but in most animals this parallelism is wanting. In some cases the eyes
of animals are set almost back to back, rendering it impossible for them
to see the same object with both eyes at once.

Buffon makes the remark, that after the eyes, the eyebrows contribute
more strongly than any other part of the face towards giving character
to the physiognomy, being, inasmuch as they differ in their nature from
the other features, more apparent by contrast, and hence strike us more
than any other portion of the countenance. They are, in fact, a shadow
in the picture, bringing its colour and drawing into strong relief. The
eyelashes also contribute their effect; when they are long and thick,
they overshadow the eye, making its glance appear softer and more
beautiful. The ape is the only other animal besides man that possesses
two eyelashes, the rest having them only on the upper eyelid. Even in
man they are more abundant in the upper eyelid than in the lower. The
eyebrows have but two movements, upward and downward, governed by the
muscles of the forehead. In the action of frowning we not only lower
them, but move them slightly towards each other. The eyelids serve to
protect the eyeball, and keep the cornea from becoming dry. The upper
eyelid has the power of raising and lowering itself, the lower one being
almost destitute of movement. Although the motion of the eyelids is an
effort of will, there are times when it is impossible to keep them open,
as for instance when we are overpowered by sleep, or when the eyes are
suddenly subjected to the effects of strong light. The eyelid is a most
admirable arrangement for the protection of the eye, and it is almost
impossible to admire this provision of nature too much, even when we
confine ourselves to an outward examination of it. It is not merely the
outward mechanism and motion of the eyelids, nor the colour of the eyes,
that constitutes their beauty; we have already said that the leading
characteristic of the eye was _expression_. It is this expression which
causes the eye to appear to speak, to fire up suddenly, to sparkle with
flashes of light, to languish or conceal itself underneath its lashes,
to raise itself with inspiration, or to pierce the abyss of thought,
just according to the particular sentiment governing the mind at the
moment. Hence it is expression that constitutes the true beauty of the
eye: every one knows instances of eyes which, while at rest, would never
be noticed by anybody, but which, when once animated by intense
eloquence, lend to the voice of their possessor an unexpected power,
which moves and transports the listener to an extent infinitely beyond
that resulting from the simple spoken words.

Enough, however, has been said upon the external aspect of the human
eye; we will, therefore, at once endeavour to penetrate the circle in
which are contained the wonders that this little book is intended to
describe. The object of these lines is not so much to describe the
beauty of man’s glances, nor the value of his senses, but rather to make
known those illusions to which the most sagacious of all his senses is
apt to fall a prey. But before entering the temple it was but right to
have bestowed a little admiration upon the façade. By the way, as we are
about to describe many illusory wonders, do not let us commence by
deceiving ourselves with regard to our first marvel—the eye itself. A
great philosopher calls the eyes the windows of the soul, and, although
meant as a poetical image, the saying is not far from the truth; for the
optic nerve by which we see external objects, is an extension of the
nerves of the brain, whose functions and actions are an unfathomable
mystery.

OF all the senses, says an ardent admirer of nature, the sight is
certainly that which furnishes the mind with the quickest and most
widely-extended perceptions. It is the source of the richest treasures
of the imagination, and of our ideas of the beauty, order, and unity of
the world around us. How unhappy are those whom a hard fate has deprived
of the sense of sight from their birth! Alas! the finest day and the
darkest night differ in nothing as far as they are concerned; the light
of heaven never brings joy into their hearts. The enamelled beauties of
a bed of flowers, the varied plumage of the peacock, the glories of the
rainbow are alike unknown to them. They cannot contemplate from the
mountain height the beauties of the valley beneath; the fields golden
with the harvest, the meadows smiling with verdure, and watered by
winding rivers, and the habitations of man dotted about here and there
over the surface of this magnificent picture. To them is unknown the
sight of the mighty ocean; and the innumerable legions of the cloud army
of Heaven are to them as if they did not exist. The impenetrable
obscurity which surrounds them allows them neither the contemplation of
what is grandest in man’s outward aspect, nor even the admiration of
those qualities which they themselves would hold most dear.

A strong sentiment of pity should, therefore, animate the breast of
every right-thinking man, when he considers the unhappy condition of
those who are born blind.

The eye infinitely surpasses in its complexity and beauty of structure
all the other organs of sense, and is most unquestionably the most
marvellous object that the human mind is capable of examining and
understanding. Let us first examine the external parts of this wonderful
organ. With what a singular system of entrenchments and defences do we
find the eye provided! It is itself placed in the head at a certain
depth, and surrounded on all sides by solid bone, so that it is only
with the greatest difficulty that it is hurt by accident from without.
The eyebrows also play their part as protection to the eye, and prevent
the perspiration from entering and irritating the organ. The eyelids too
are always ready to rush to the rescue, whether to protect the eye from
outward attacks, or to shade it from too strong a light during sleep.
The eyelashes not only add to the beauty of the eye, but they shade it
from the too brilliant light of the sun, and act as advanced guards to
prevent the entrance of dust or any other foreign body with which the
eyes might be injured.

But its internal structure is still more admirable. The globe of the eye
is almost spherical and measures nearly one inch in diameter. Fig. 1 is
a view of the eyeball, showing the details of its structure; the various
membranes surrounding it have been cut away in order that it may be
better examined. If we commence our examination by the exterior portion
of the front, we shall first find immediately beneath the eyelashes a
perfectly transparent membrane (C), called the _cornea_. It is a
prolongation of the hard opaque external coating of the eye, called the
_sclerotic membrane_, and marked S in the figure. The cornea is
sufficiently hard in its nature to present a strong resistance to any
violence from without.

Immediately beneath the cornea and in contact with it is the _aqueous
humour_, a thin transparent liquid occupying a small portion of the
front of the eye.

Next comes the _iris_, a circular disc perforated with a round hole in
the middle, and coloured with various shades of blue, brown, and grey.

OF all the senses, says an ardent admirer of nature, the sight is
certainly that which furnishes the mind with the quickest and most
widely-extended perceptions. It is the source of the richest treasures
of the imagination, and of our ideas of the beauty, order, and unity of
the world around us. How unhappy are those whom a hard fate has deprived
of the sense of sight from their birth! Alas! the finest day and the
darkest night differ in nothing as far as they are concerned; the light
of heaven never brings joy into their hearts. The enamelled beauties of
a bed of flowers, the varied plumage of the peacock, the glories of the
rainbow are alike unknown to them. They cannot contemplate from the
mountain height the beauties of the valley beneath; the fields golden
with the harvest, the meadows smiling with verdure, and watered by
winding rivers, and the habitations of man dotted about here and there
over the surface of this magnificent picture. To them is unknown the
sight of the mighty ocean; and the innumerable legions of the cloud army
of Heaven are to them as if they did not exist. The impenetrable
obscurity which surrounds them allows them neither the contemplation of
what is grandest in man’s outward aspect, nor even the admiration of
those qualities which they themselves would hold most dear.

A strong sentiment of pity should, therefore, animate the breast of
every right-thinking man, when he considers the unhappy condition of
those who are born blind.

The eye infinitely surpasses in its complexity and beauty of structure
all the other organs of sense, and is most unquestionably the most
marvellous object that the human mind is capable of examining and
understanding. Let us first examine the external parts of this wonderful
organ. With what a singular system of entrenchments and defences do we
find the eye provided! It is itself placed in the head at a certain
depth, and surrounded on all sides by solid bone, so that it is only
with the greatest difficulty that it is hurt by accident from without.
The eyebrows also play their part as protection to the eye, and prevent
the perspiration from entering and irritating the organ. The eyelids too
are always ready to rush to the rescue, whether to protect the eye from
outward attacks, or to shade it from too strong a light during sleep.
The eyelashes not only add to the beauty of the eye, but they shade it
from the too brilliant light of the sun, and act as advanced guards to
prevent the entrance of dust or any other foreign body with which the
eyes might be injured.

But its internal structure is still more admirable. The globe of the eye
is almost spherical and measures nearly one inch in diameter. Fig. 1 is
a view of the eyeball, showing the details of its structure; the various
membranes surrounding it have been cut away in order that it may be
better examined. If we commence our examination by the exterior portion
of the front, we shall first find immediately beneath the eyelashes a
perfectly transparent membrane (C), called the _cornea_. It is a
prolongation of the hard opaque external coating of the eye, called the
_sclerotic membrane_, and marked S in the figure. The cornea is
sufficiently hard in its nature to present a strong resistance to any
violence from without.

Immediately beneath the cornea and in contact with it is the _aqueous
humour_, a thin transparent liquid occupying a small portion of the
front of the eye.

Next comes the _iris_, a circular disc perforated with a round hole in
the middle, and coloured with various shades of blue, brown, and grey.The opening in the centre, which appears like a black spot when the eye
is examined, is not really an object, but simply an aperture, capable of
changing its size according to the quantity of light striking the eye.
This change of size in the opening, or pupil, as it is popularly called,
is effected by the contraction or expansion of the iris, which thus
possesses the peculiar property of exactly proportioning the amount of
light that enters the eye, so that there is never too much or too
little. It is through the pupil that the rays of light proceeding from
the various objects around us pass into the interior of the eye, and
form an image upon the retina, as will be afterwards explained.

Immediately behind the pupil is O, a bi-convex lens to transmit the rays
of light to the retina. It is generally called the _crystalline lens_.

From the crystalline lens to the back of the eyeball, is a space more or
less globular in form, containing a gelatinous diaphanous mass somewhat
resembling white of egg in appearance, and called the _vitreous humour_.

Behind the vitreous humour, and immediately opposite the pupil and lens,
is the most delicate and important of all the membranes of the eye, the
_retina_, which serves as a screen whereon are received the images of
the objects around us. This membrane is an expansion of the optic nerve
N leading from the brain, and lines the whole of the interior of the
eye. The eye is also enveloped in a second membrane (C), called the
_choroid_, which is impregnated with a black pigment. Round this is
wrapped a third membrane, the _sclerotic_ (S), which unites with the
cornea in front of the eyeball.

The crystalline lens through which all the rays pass before they reach
the retina, possesses the marvellous power of being able to modify its
curvature in such a manner as to adapt itself to the distance of the
object seen, and thus throw a distinct image on the retina. When we come
to talk of the properties of lenses, we shall see that the focus of a
lens differs for objects at different distances; if, therefore, the eye
were not provided with some such means for altering the focus of the
crystalline lens, we should only see objects distinctly at one
particular point. The crystalline lens consists of infinite numbers of
extremely thin transparent little plates, each of which is in itself
composed of fine fibres so united together as to be capable of a small
degree of compression or extension. Hence the power of the lens to alter
its form according to circumstances. It is calculated that the human eye
contains over five millions of the laminæ above referred to. With such
wonders is the world of nature replete,—wonders that we daily and hourly
pass by without examination.

It is by means of this ingenious and inimitable structure of the eye
that external objects pass from the domain of the material world into
that of the mind, and become accessible to every faculty of our brain.
Of its own accord, and without apparently any effort of our own will,
does this marvellous mechanism adapt itself to all the variations of
distance and intensity of light, a power possessed by no instrument as
yet constructed by the hand of man—being capable, as it is, of
distinguishing instantaneously between the distance of the remotest
nebulæ and that of the letters forming this page. This wonderful organ,
writes Brewster, may be considered as being the sentinel that guards the
passage between the world of matter and that of mind, and as the medium
through which they interchange all their communications. The optic nerve
perceives the objects written on the retina by the hand of nature, and
conveys them to the brain in all their integrity of form and colour.

The path of the rays of light and the formation of images upon the
retina are shown in the preceding figure. At first sight it will be
perceived that the objects thereon depicted are in a reversed position,
that is to say, when we look at a view similar to that shown in fig. 2,
we should find, if we had any means of observing the positions of
objects reflected on our retina, that the flock of sheep coming up the
road were at the top of the eye, while the trees, the roof of the house,
and the chimney were in the contrary position. Similar reversed images
may be seen in dark rooms, by holding a screen before any little crack
or pinhole in the door or shutter of the room. In fig. 2 the keyhole of
the door is represented as playing the part of a lens. The author, in
common with almost every other boy, observed this fact at a very early
age, and the idea immediately struck him that it would be only necessary
to fix these images to procure exact representations of natural scenery;
but in making inquiries into the subject, he found that his juvenile
observations had been made a little too late, photography having already
gained the end he intended striving for.

Seeing that the images of all objects appear on our retina upside down,
the student is naturally disposed to ask how it happens that we do not
see them in that position. Physiologists and natural philosophers have
advanced numerous theories on the subject. Some, with Buffon, admit at
once that it is by habit and education of the eye that we see objects
unreversed. Others, like the great physiologist Müller, imagine that as
we see everything upside down, and not a single object only, we have no
points of comparison, and practically ignore the reversal. The truth,
however, appears to be that it is the brain, and not the eye, that
possesses the power of determining the real position of what we see.
That the eye alone has no power of determining the positions of objects
by itself, may be easily proved by showing a person an astronomical
object, such as the moon through a telescope. Unless the observer has
been already familiarized with the appearance of our satellite, he will
not know whether the image he sees is reversed or not. It is the brain,
therefore, and the brain only, that has the power of determining the
position of objects around us, without taking into consideration the
reversed picture of them that is depicted on our retina. The student who
takes an interest in the structure of this important organ, would do
well to procure a sheep’s or bullock’s eye from the butchers, and
dissect it carefully with a sharp penknife and pair of scissors. The
image formed on the retina may be easily seen by cutting away the
sclerotic and choroid coatings at the back of the eye.

The ordinary distance of distinct vision for small objects, such as the
letters of a book, is from ten to twelve inches. But possibly there do
not exist two pairs of eyes in the world whose foci are the same. Even
in the same individual it frequently happens that the focal length of
the eyes differs considerably. In some persons the focus of the eye is
so reduced that they are obliged to bring the object they are examining
within six, and even four inches of their eyes, before they can see it.
This defect is known ordinarily as _short sight_, and results from the
too great convexity of the cornea and crystalline lens. It is corrected
by wearing spectacles with concave glasses. Others again, on the
contrary, place the book or object they are looking at, at a greater
distance from the eye than that named. Such people are called
long-sighted, and the defect results from the too great flatness of the
cornea and the crystalline lens. The fault is of course corrected by the
use of spectacles containing convex lenses.

Long-sightedness is generally the result of old age, and it may be taken
as a fact that the older we grow the flatter becomes the crystalline
lens. Hence short-sighted people have been known to recover their sight
perfectly as they advance in years through the natural process of the
flattening of the crystalline lens. These matters, however, will be more
fully treated of when we begin to speak of the properties of lenses of
different forms and curvatures.
